Now, to return to Tom and Becky's share in the picnic, they tripped
along the murky isles with the rest of the company, visiting the
familiar wonders of the cave, wonders dubbed with rather over-descriptive
names, such as the Drawing Room, the Cathedral, Aladdin's Palace, and
so on. Presently the hide-and-seek frolicking began, and Tom and Becky
engaged in it with zeal, until the exertion began to grow a trifle
wearisome. Then they wandered down a sinuous avenue, holding their
candles aloft, and reading the tangled web-work of names, dates, post-office
addresses, and mottos, with which the rocky walls had been frescoed in
a candle-smoke. Still drifting along and talking, they scarcely noticed
that they were now in a part of the cave whose walls were not frescoed.
They smoked their own names under an overhanging shelf, and moved on.
Presently they came to a place where a little stream of water, trickling
over a ledge, and carrying a limestone sediment with it, had, in the
slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and ruffled Niagara in gleaming and
imperishable stone. Tom squeezed his small body behind it in order to
illuminate it for Becky's gratification. He found that it curtained a
sort of steep natural stairway which was enclosed between narrow walls,
and at once the ambition to be a discoverer seized him. Becky responded
to his call, and they made a smoke-mark for future guidance, and started
upon their quest. They wound this way and that far down into the secret
depths of the cave, made another mark, and branched off in search of
novelties to tell the upper world about. In one place they found a
spacious cavern from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining
stalactites of the length and circumference of a man's leg. They walked
all about it, wondering and admiring, and presently left it by one of
the numerous passages that opened into it. This shortly brought them to
a bewitching spring whose basin was encrusted with a frostwork of
glittering crystals. It was in the midst of a cavern whose walls were
supported by many fantastic pillars which had been formed by the
joining of great stalactites and stalagmites together, the result of
the ceaseless water-drip of centuries. Under the roof, vast knots of
bats had packed themselves together, thousands in a bunch, the lights
disturbed the creatures, and they came flocking down by hundreds
squeaking and darting furiously at the candles. Tom knew their ways, and
he knew the danger of this sort of conduct. He seized Becky's hand and
hurried her into the first corridor that offered, and none too soon,
for a bat struck Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing
out of the cavern. The bats chased the children a good distance, but
the fugitives plunged into every new passage that offered, and at last
got rid of the perilous things. Tom found a subterranean lake shortly,
which stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the
shadows. He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would
be best to sit down and rest awhile first. Now, for the first time, the
deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the
children. Becky said,
"'Why, I didn't notice, but it seems ever so long since I heard of any
of the others.'
"'Come to think, Becky, we are a way down below them, and I don't know
how far away north or south or east or whichever it is. We couldn't
hear them here.' Becky grew apprehensive.
"'I wonder how long we've been down here, Tom. We'd better start back.'
"'Yes, I reckon we'd better. Perhaps we'd better. Can you find the way,
Tom? It's all a mixed-up crookedness to me.'
"'I reckon I could find it, but then the bats. If they put both of our
candles out, it will be an awful fix. Let's try some other way, so as
not to go through there.'
"'Well, but I hope we won't get lost. It would be so awful.' And the
girls shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities. They
started through a corridor and traversed it in silence a long way,
glancing at each new opening to see if there was anything familiar about
the look of it. But they were all strange. Every time Tom made an
examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign, and he
would say cheerily,
"'Oh, it's all right. This ain't the one. But we'll come to it right
away.'
But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently began
to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate hope of
finding the one that was wanted. He still said it was all right, but
there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words had lost their
ring and sounded just as if he had said,
"'All is lost.' Becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried
hard to keep back the tears. But they would come. At last she said,
"'Oh, Tom, never mind the bats. Let's go back that way. We seem to get
worse and worse off all the time.' Tom stopped.
"'Listen,' said he. Profound silence. Silence so deep that even their
breathings were conspicuous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went
echoing down the empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint
sound that resembled a ripple of mocking laughter.
"'Oh, don't do it again, Tom. It is too horrid,' said Becky.
"'It is horrid, but I better, Becky. They might hear us, you know.' And
he shouted again. The might was even a chillier horror than the ghostly
laughter. It so confessed a perishing hope. The children stood still and
listened. But there was no result. Tom turned upon the back track at
once and hurried his steps. It was but a little while before a certain
indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky. He
could not find his way back.
"'Oh, Tom, you didn't make any marks. Becky, I was such a fool, such a
fool. I never thought we might want to come back. No, I can't find the
way. It's all mixed up. Tom! Tom, we're lost! We're lost! We never can
get out of this awful place. Why did we ever leave the others?' She
sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom was
appalled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason. He sat
down by her and put his arms around her. She buried her face in his
bosom. She clung to him. She poured out her terrors, her unavailing
regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter. Tom
begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell
to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable
situation, and this had a better effect. She said she would try to hope
again. She would get up and follow wherever he might lead, if only he
would not talk like that any more, for he was no more to blame than she,
she said. So they moved on again aimlessly, simply at random. All they
could do was to move, keep moving. For a little while, hope made a show
of reviving, not with any reason to back it, but only because it is its
nature to revive, when the spring has not been taken out of it by age
and familiarity with failure.
By and by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This economy meant
so much. Words were not needed. Becky understood, and her hope died
again. She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in
his pockets, yet he must economize. By and by fatigue began to assert
its claims. The children tried to pay no attention, for it was dreadful
to think of sitting down when time was grown to be so precious. Moving
in some direction, in any direction, was at least progress, and might
bear fruit, but to sit down was to invite death and shorten its pursuit.
At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat down.
Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there,
and the comfortable beds, and, above all, the light. Becky cried, and
Tom tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his
encouragement were grown threadbare with use, and sounded like
sarcasms.
Fatigue bore so heavily upon Becky that she drowsed off to sleep. Tom
was grateful. He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow
smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams, and by and
by a smile dawned and rested there. The peaceful face reflected somewhat
of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his thoughts wandered
way to bygone times and dreamy memories.
While he was deep in his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little
laugh, but it was stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.
Oh, how could I sleep! I wish I never, never had waked! No, no, I don't,
Tom. Don't look so. I won't say it again. I'm glad you've slept, Becky.
You'll feel rested now, and we'll find the way out. We can try, Tom,
But I've seen such a beautiful country in my dream. I reckon we are
going there.
Maybe not. Maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying.
They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand, and hopeless. They tried
to estimate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was
that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not
be, for their candles were not gone yet. A long time after this, they
could not tell how long. Tom said they must go softly and listen to
dripping water. They must find a spring. They found one presently, and
Tom said it was time to rest again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky
said she thought she could go on a little farther. She was surprised to
hear Tom dissent. She could not understand it. They sat down, and Tom
fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay. Thought
was soon busy, nothing was said for some time. Then Becky broke the
silence.
"'Tom, I'm so hungry!' Tom took something out of his pocket. Do you
remember this?' said he.
Becky almost smiled.
"'It's our wedding cake, Tom!'
"'Yes, I wish it was as big as a barrel, for it's all we've got.'
"'I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grown-up
people do with wedding cake, but it'll be our--"
She dropped the sentence, where it was.
Tom divided the cake, and Becky ate with good appetite, while Tom
nibbled at his moiety. There was abundance of cold water to finish the
feast with. By-and-by, Becky suggested that they move on again. Tom was
silent a moment, then he said,
"'Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something?'
Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.
"'Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink.
That little piece is our last candle.'
Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he could to
comfort her, but with little effect. At length, Becky said,
"'Tom!'
"'Well, Becky, they'll miss us and hunt for us.'
"'Yes, they will. Certainly they will. Maybe they're hunting for us
now, Tom.'
"'Why, I reckon, maybe they are. I hope they are.'
"'When would they miss us, Tom?'
"'When they get back to the boat, I reckon.'
"'Tom, it might be dark, then. Would they notice we hadn't come?'
"'I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they
got home.'
A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses, and he
saw that he had made a blunder. Becky was not to have gone home that
night. The children became silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new
burst of grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had
struck hers also, that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before
Mrs. Thatcher discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's. The
children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle, and watched it
melt slowly and pitilessly away, saw the half-inch of wick stand alone
at last, saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climbed the thin column of
smoke, linger at its top a moment, and then the horror of utter darkness
reigned.
How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that
she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew
was that, after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out
of a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more. Tom
said it might be Sunday now, maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to
talk, but her sorrows were too oppressive. All her hopes were gone. Tom
said that they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search
was going on. He would shout, and maybe someone would come. He tried
it, but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that
he tried it no more.
The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again. A
portion of Tom's half of the cake was left. They divided and ate it. But
they seemed hungrier than before. The poor morsel of food only whetted
desire.
By-and-by Tom said,
"'Shh! Did you hear that?'
Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the faintest
far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky by the hand,
started groping down the corridor in its direction. Presently he listened
again. Again the sound was heard, and apparently a little nearer.
"'It's them,' said Tom.
"'They're coming. Come along, Becky. We're all right now.' The joy of the
prisoners was almost overwhelming. Their speed was slow, however,
because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be guarded against.
They shortly came to one, and had to stop. It might be three feet deep.
It might be a hundred. There was no passing it at any rate. Tom got down
on his breast, and reached as far down as he could. No bottom. They must
stay there and wait until the searchers came. They listened. Evidently
the distant shoutings were growing more distant. A moment or two more,
and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking misery of it. Tom whooped
until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He talked hopefully to Becky,
but an age of anxious waiting passed, and no sounds came again. The
children groped their way back to the spring. The weary time dragged on.
They slept again, and awoke famished and woe-stricken. Tom believed it
must be Tuesday by this time. Now an idea struck him. There were some
side passages near at hand. It would be better to explore some of these
than bear the weight of the heavy time in idleness. He took a kite-line
from his pocket, tied it to a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom
in the lead, unwinding the line as he groped along. At the end of twenty
paces the corridor ended in a jumping-off place. Tom got down on his
knees and felt below, and then as far around the corner as he could
reach with his hands conveniently. He made an effort to stretch yet a
little farther to the right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away,
a human hand holding a candle appeared from behind a rock. Tom lifted
up a glorious shout, and instantly that hand was followed by the body
it belonged to. Injun Joe's! Tom was paralyzed. He could not move. He
was vastly gratified the next moment to see the Spaniard take to his
heels and get himself out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not
recognized his voice and come over and killed him for testifying in
court. But the echoes must have disguised the voice. Without doubt
that was it, he reasoned. Tom's fright weakened every muscle in his
body. He said to himself that if he had strength enough to get back to
the spring he would stay there, and nothing should tempt him to run the
risk of meeting Injun Joe again. He was careful to keep from Becky what
it was he had seen. He told her he had only shouted for luck.
But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run.
Another tedious wait of the spring and another long sleep brought
changes. The children awoke, tortured with a raging hunger. Tom
believed that it must be Wednesday or Thursday, or even Friday or
Saturday now, and that the search had been given over. He proposed to
explore another passage. He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all
other terrors. But Becky was very weak. She had sunk into a dreary
apathy and would not be roused. She said she would wait, now, where she
was, and die. It would not be long. She told Tom to go with his kite
line and explore if he chose, but she implored him to come back every
little while and speak to her, and she made him promise that when the
awful time came he would stay by her and hold her hand until all was
over. Tom kissed her with a choking sensation in his throat, and made
a show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from
the cave. Then he took the kite line in his hand and went groping down
one of the passages on his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and
sick with bodings of coming doom.
CHAPTER XXXII.
Turn out! They're found!
Tuesday afternoon came and waned to the twilight. The village of St.
Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had not been found. Public
prayers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private prayer
that had the petitioner's whole heart in it, but still no good news came
from the cave. The majority of the searchers had given up the quest and
gone back to their daily vocations, saying that it was plain the
ill, and a great part of the time delirious. People said it was
heartbreaking to hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen
a whole minute at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan.
Aunt Polly had drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had
grown almost white. The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad
and forlorn. Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the
village bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic
half-clad people, who shouted,
"'Turn out! Turn out! They're found! They're found!'
Tin pans and horns were added to the din. The population massed itself
and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open carriage
drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its homeward
march, and swept magnificently up the main street roaring, "'Huzzah!'
after huzzah!'
The village was illuminated. Nobody went to bed again. It was the
a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized
the saved ones, and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried
to speak but couldn't, and drifted out raining tears all over the place.
Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It
would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with the
great news to the cave should get the word to her husband. Tom lay upon
a sofa with an eager auditory about him, and told the history of the
wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it with
all, and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on an
exploring expedition, how he followed two avenues as far as his kite
line would reach, how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of the
kite line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off speck
that looked like daylight, dropped the line and groped toward it, pushed
his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad
Mississippi rolling by. And if it had only happened to be night, he
would not have seen that speck of daylight, and would not have explored
that passage any more. He told how he went back for Becky, and broke the
good news, and she told him not to fret her with such stuff, for she
was tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to. He described
how he labored with her and convinced her, and how she almost died for
joy when she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of
daylight, how he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out,
how they sat there and cried for gladness, how some men came along in a
skiff, and Tom hailed them and told them their situation and their
famished condition, how the men didn't believe the wild tale at first,
because, said they, you are five miles down the river, below the valley
the cave is in, then took them aboard, rode to a house, gave them
supper, made them rest till two or three hours after dark, and then
brought them home.
Before day dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him
were tracked out in the cave by the twine clues they had strung behind
them and informed of the great news. Three days and nights of toil and
hunger in the cave were not to be shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky
soon discovered. They were bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday,
and seemed to grow more and more tired and worn all the time. Tom got
about a little on Thursday, was downtown Friday, and nearly as whole as
ever Saturday, but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then
she looked as if she had passed through a wasting illness.
Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but could
not be admitted to the bedroom. Neither could he on Saturday or Sunday.
He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about
his adventure and introduced no exciting topic. The widow Douglas
stayed by to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff
kill-event, also that the ragged man's body had eventually been found
in the river near the ferry landing. He had been drowned while trying
to escape, perhaps.
About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough now to hear exciting
talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought. Judge
Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky. The
ironically, if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again. Tom said he
thought he wouldn't mind it. The judge said,
"'Well, there are others just like you, Tom. I've not the least doubt.
But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave
any more.'
"'Why?'
"'Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler-iron two weeks ago,
and triple-locked, and I've got the keys.'
Tom turned as white as a sheet.
"'What's the matter, boy? Here, run somebody. Fetch a glass of water.'
The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.
"'Ah, now you're all right. What was the matter with you, Tom?'
"'Oh, Judge! Injun Joe's in the cave!'
End of chapter 32